
A series may have either a finite or infinite number of terms. In either case, the sum of the first $N$ terms (called the **partial sum** of a series) is written 

$$
S_{N} = u_{1} + u_{2} + u_{3} + \dots + u_{N}

$$

where the terms $u_{n},\\ n=1,2,3\dots N$  are numbers (which may, in general, be complex numbers).

If the terms are complex, then $S_{N}$ will be complex as well, and we can write 

$$
S_{N} = X_{N} + iY_{N} 
$$

where $X_{N}$ and $Y_{N}$ are the partial sums of the real and imaginary parts of each term separately, and therefore both $X_{N}$ and $Y_{N}$ are real.

If the series has only $N$ terms, then $S_{N}$ is just the sum of the series.

Sometimes we encounter series where each term is dependent on some variable, say $x$:

$$
S(x) = 1 + x + \frac{x^{2}}{2!}+\frac{x^{3}}{3!}+\dots

$$
The partial sum of this infinite series for any $N$ will depend on the chosen value of $x$. The above series is a **power series** of a particular type, called a **Maclaurin series**. A series in general may depend on a complex variable $z$.

***

In general, there need not be any relationship between successive terms of a series (they may be random numbers) - but this is not particularly useful so we mainly constrict our study to series that display a meaningful pattern.

For example, if the $n$th term of a series is given by 

$$
u_{n}=\frac{1}{2^n}
$$

..for $n=1,2,3\dots N$, then the sum of the first $N$ terms is given by:

$$
S_{N} = \sum_{n=1}^N u_{n} = \frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + \dots + \frac{1}{2^N}
$$

Clearly, the sum of a fine series is finite (so long as all the terms are finite). Often, however, we may need to evaluate the sum of series with an infinite number of finite terms. We can do this by first examining the partial sum of the first $N$ terms as we did above, and then examining the behavior as $N \to \infty$. If the value of the partial sum $S_{N}$ tends to a finite limit, $S$, as $N$ tends to infinity, then the series is said to *converge*, and its sum is given by the limit $S$:

$$
S = \lim_{ N \to \infty } S_{N}
$$
..provided this limit exists.











