# 10.3 - Rotation about any Axis and the Inertia Tensor:
***

So far we have considered only a body that is rotating about the z axis. In a certain sense this is quite general: Whatever axis a body is rotating about, we can choose to call it the z axis. Unfortunately, although this statement is true, it does not tell the whole story.

First, we are often interested in bodies that are free to rotate about any axis a gyroscope's bearings allow it to rotate about any axis, and a projectile (such as a baseball or a drum major's baton thrown in the air) has the same freedom. When this is the case, the axis about which the body rotates may change with time. If this happens, then we can certainly choose as our z axis the axis of rotation at one instant, but a moment later our chosen z axis is almost certainly not the axis of rotation. For this reason alone, we must clearly examine the form of the angular momentum when a body is spinning about an arbitrary axis.

The second reason that we need to consider rotation about an arbitrary axis is subtler, and we shall return to it later, but let me mention it briefly here. We have seen
that in general the direction of the angular momentum of a spinning body is not the same as the axis of rotation. On the other hand, it sometimes happens that these two directions are the same. (For instance, we have seen that this is the case for an axially symmetric body rotating about its axis of symmetry.)

When this is true, we say that the axis in question is a **principal axis**. We shall find *for any given body*, rotating about *any given point*, that there are *three mutually perpendicular principal axes*. 

Because much of our discussion of rotations is much easier when referred to these principal axes, we often wish to choose the principal axes as our *coordinate axes.* If we do this, then we are no longer at liberty to choose our z axis to coincide with an arbitrary axis of rotation. 

Again, we must learn to allow any axis to be the axis of rotation, and our first order of business is to calculate the angular momentum corresponding to such rotation.

 ---
 
 ## Angular Momentum for an Arbitrary Angular Velocity
 
 
 Let us consider a rigid body rotating around an arbitrary axis with angular velocity:
 
 > ## $$\vec \omega = (\omega_x, \omega_y, \omega_z). $$
 
 Before we launch into the calculation of the angular momentum, let's pause to consider the kinds of situations in which our calculations will apply.
 
 There are in fact two important cases to keep in mind:
 
 First, it sometimes happens that a rigid body has *one fixed point*, so that its only possible motion is a rotation about that point. The magnitude and direction of $\omega$ can change, but the rotation will always be around that fixed point, so we will naturally take that point as our origin.
 
 The second case to consider is that of an object that has been thrown into the air. Clearly there is no single fixed point in this case - but we have seen that we can analyze the motion separately in terms of the motion of the *CM* and the rotational motion *relative* to the *CM*. For the second part, we can take the *CM*, which in that frame remains stationary and is our origin. 
 
With these examples in mind, let's analyze the body's angular momentum. As before:

> ## $$ \boldsymbol L = \sum \ell_\alpha = \sum m_\alpha r_\alpha \times (\omega \times r_\alpha).$$

We can calculate this almost exactly as we did in the previous section for the case that $\omega$ was along the *z*-axis: For any position $r$ we can write down the components of $(\omega \times r)$, and then $r \times (\omega \times r)$, with the (frankly terrifying) result:

>  $$\
  \\
  r \times (\omega \times r) = \left( (y^2 + z^2)\,\; \omega_x - xy\omega_y -xz \omega_z, -yz\omega_x + (z^2+x^2)\omega_y - yz \omega_z,\; -zx\omega_x - zy\omega_y + (x^2+y^2)\,\omega_z \right).$$

 If we substitute the above into the total angular momentum, we can write the components of the angular momentum as follows:
 
 
 > $$\LARGE \left. \begin{array}{1} 
 \begin{align}
 \boldsymbol{L}_x & = \boldsymbol{I}_{xx}\omega_x + \boldsymbol{I}_{xy}\omega_y + \boldsymbol{I}_{xz}\omega_z\\
 \boldsymbol{L}_y & = \boldsymbol{I}_{yx}\omega_x +\boldsymbol{I}_{yy}\omega_y + \boldsymbol{I}_{yz}\omega_z\\
 \boldsymbol{L}_z & = \boldsymbol{I}_{zx}\omega_x + \boldsymbol{I}_{zy}\omega_y + \boldsymbol{I}_{zz}\omega_z
 \end{align}
 \end{array}
 \right\}$$
 ...where the three **moments of inertia** and six **products of inertia** are defined as in the previous section. 
 
 
 This rather clumsy result can be streamlined in a couple of ways: we can replace the subscripts $x,y$ and $z$ with an **index** $i = 1,2,3$, then that entire system takes the compact form:
 
 > ## $$\boldsymbol{L}_i = \sum_{j = 1}^3 \boldsymbol{I}_{ij}\,\omega_j. $$


This form is identical to the definition of **matrix multiplication**: thus, the angular momentum (with all its components) can be rewritten as a $3\times 3$ matrix:

>  $$\LARGE
\mathbb I =
\begin{bmatrix}
\boldsymbol{I}_{xx} & \boldsymbol{I}_{xy} & \boldsymbol{I}_{xz}\\
\boldsymbol{I}_{yx} & \boldsymbol{I}_{yy} & \boldsymbol{I}_{yz}\\
\boldsymbol{I}_{zx} & \boldsymbol{I}_{zy} & \boldsymbol{I}_{zz}
\end{bmatrix}.$$

This $\mathbb I$ is called the **inertia tensor**.

In addition, let us agree temporarily to consider the three-dimensional vectors $\vec {\boldsymbol L}$ and $\vec \omega$ as $3\times 1$ columns made up of their components; that is, we write:

> $$\LARGE 
\vec{\boldsymbol L} =
\begin{bmatrix}
\boldsymbol{L}_x\\
\boldsymbol{L}_y\\
\boldsymbol{L}_z\\
\end{bmatrix}
\qquad \text{and} \qquad
\vec{\omega} =
\begin{bmatrix}
\omega_x\\
\omega_y\\
\omega_z\\
\end{bmatrix}.$$

The **total angular momentum** now takes the very compact form:

> ## $$\vec{\boldsymbol{L}} =\mathbb I \;\vec \omega.   $$



 ***
 
 #physics #classical_mechanics #rotation #products_of_inertia #moment_of_inertia #angular_momentum #inertia_tensor #linear_algebra #matrix #symmetry
 