rzA previous example employed the useful property that, since the function to be represented was odd, all the cosine terms of the Fourier series disappeared. It is often the case that the function we wish to represent has some particular symmetry which we can exploit to reduce the computational labor of calculating the Fourier coefficients.

Functions that are symmetric or antisymmetric about the origin (i.e. even or odd functions, respectively) admit particularly useful simplifications. Functions that are odd in $x$ have no cosine terms, and all the $a$ coefficients are equal to zero. Similarly, functions that are even in $x$ have no sine terms, and all the coefficients $b_n$ are zero.

The consequences of symmetry or antisymmetry of the function about the *quarter period* (i.e. about $\frac{L}{4}$) are less obvious, and the results are not used as often. The following argument gives the required results:

Suppose that $f(x)$ has even or odd symmetry about $\frac{L}{4}$, i.e. $f\left( \frac{L}{4} - x \right) = \pm f\left( x - \frac{L}{4} \right)$.

For convenience, we make the substitution $s=x-\frac{L}{4}$ , and hence $f(-s)=\pm f(-s)$.

We can now see that

$$

b_{r} = \frac{2}{L} \int_{x_{0}}^{x_{0}+L} f(s)\sin \left( \frac{2\pi rs}{L}+\frac{\pi r}{2} \right)  \, ds
$$
	(The limits of integration have been left unaltered, since $f$ is periodic in $s$ as well as $x$.)


We can utilize a helpful trigonometric expansion:

$$

\sin \left( \frac{2\pi rs}{L}+\frac{\pi r}{2} \right) = \sin \left( \frac{2\pi rs}{L} \right) \cos\left( \frac{\pi r}{2} \right)+\cos\left( \frac{2\pi rs}{L} \right)\sin\left( \frac{\pi r}{2} \right)
$$


It can be seen from the above that if $r$ is even, the trigonometric part of the integral is an *odd* function of $s$, and if $r$ is odd, then the trigonometric part is an even function of $x$. 

Hence, if $f(s)$ and $r$ are both even, **or** if $f(s)$ and $r$ are both odd, then the integral is zero. Similar results can be applied to the Fourier $a$-coefficients.

