# 9.3 - The Angular Velocity Vector: 
***

The remainder of this chapter is concerned with the motion of objects in reference frames that are **rotating** relative to inertial frames. Before we begin this discussion, we must introduce some concepts and notation for handling rotations. A detailed study of rotations turns out to be surprisingly complicated. Fortunately for now, we don't need many of the details, and some of the properties that are quite difficult to prove are reasonably plausible and can be stated without proof. 

The rotating axes with which we will be concerned are almost axes *fixed* in a rigid body. The most important example is a set of axes fixed in the rotating Earth, but we shall see several other examples. 

In discussing the rotation of a rigid body, there are really just two situations that concern us: Sometimes the body is rotating about a point of the body that is *fixed* (in some inertial frames); for example, a wheel that is spinning about a fixed axle, or a pendulum swinging about a fixed pivot. If the rotating body has *no* fixed point (eg. a baseball that is rotating as it flies through the air), then we usually proceed in two steps - first, we find the motion of the *center of mass*, and then we analyze the rotational motion of the body *relative* to the *CM*. As soon as we restrict our attention to the motion relative to the *CM*, we are in effect examining the motion *in a reference frame in which the CM is fixed*.

The crucial result concerning a body rotating about any fixed point is called **Euler's theorem**, which states that the *most general motion of any body relative to a fixed point O*  is a *rotation about some axis through O*. The theorem implies that to specify a rotation about a given point *O*, we need only to give the direction of the axis about which the rotation occurred, and the angle through which the body rotated. 

Here, our concern is more with the *rate* of rotation, or **angular velocity**, and Euler's theorem implies that this can be specified by giving the *direction of the axis of rotation* and the *rate of rotation about this axis*. The direction of this axis of rotation can be specified with a unit vector $\hat u$ and the rate by the differential, $\omega = d\theta /dt$. For example, a merry-go-round may rotate about a vertical axis ($\hat u$ points vertically) at a rate of $10\,rad/min$.

It is often convenient to combine the unit vector $\hat u$ with $\omega$ to form an **angular velocity vector**:

> ## $$\vec{\omega} = \omega \vec u. $$

This single vector specifies both the direction of the axis and the rate of rotation. The direction of rotation is conventionally given by the right-hand-rule. 

***


## Addition of Angular Velocities:

A final basic property of angular velocities that is worth mentioning is that relative angular velocities *add* in the same way as relative translational velocities. We know (at least, in the framework of classical mechanics) that if two frames, $2$ and $1$, have relative velocity $v_{21}$, and if a body $3$ has velocity $v_{32}$ relative to frame $2$, then the velocity of $3$ relative to frame $1$ is simply the sum:

> ## $$v_{31} = v_{32} + v_{21}. $$

Suppose that instead, frame $2$ is rotating with angular velocity $\omega_{21}$ relative to frame $1$ (both frames having the same origin *O*), and that body $3$ is rotating about *O* with angular velocities $\omega_{21}$ and $\omega_{32}$ with respect to frames $1$ and $2$.

Now, consider any point $r$ in body $3$. Its translational velocities relative to frames $1$ and $2$ must satisfy the above relation. Thus: 

> ## $$\omega_{31} \times r = (\omega_{32} \times r) + (\omega_{21} \times r) = (\omega_{32} + \omega_{21} )\times r. $$

For this to be true for all $r$, it follows that:

> ## $$\omega_{31} = \omega_{32} + \omega_{21}.$$


Thus, angular velocities add in the same way as translational velocities. 

***

## Notation for Angular Velocities:

In labeling angular velocities, we shall observe the following convention: we will use the lower-case $\omega$ to denote the angular velocity of a body whose motion is our primary object of interest. We will use the capital $\Omega$ for the angular velocity of a noninertial rotating reference frame, which is typically known. 


***