# 1.A - $R^n$ and $C^n$

***


The set of **real numbers** with which we are familar is denoted as **$R^n$**. 

**Complex numbers** were invented so that we can take square roots of *negative* real numbers. The symbol *$i$* was first used to denote $\sqrt{-1}$ by *Leonhard Euler* in $1777_{CE}$. 

***

> #### 1.1: Definition of complex numbers
> - A complex number is an ordered pair $(a,b)$, where $a,b \in \bf{R}$ . The elements of the ordered pair correspond to the real and imaginary parts of the number respectively. We will write this explicitly as $a+bi$.
> - The *set* of all complex numbers is denoted by **$C$**:
> >$$ \bf{C} = \mathit{\{a+bi:a,b \in \bf{R}\}}.$$
> - **Addition** and** multiplication** on $\bf{C}$ are defined by:
> >$$(a+bi) + (c + di) = (a + c) + (b+d)i,$$
>> $$(a + bi) (c+di)=(ac-bd)+(ad+bc)i ;$$
> ...where $a,b,c,d \in \bf{R}$.

***


If $a \in {R}$, we identify $\mathit{a + 0i}$ with the real number $a$. Thus, we can think of $\bf{R}$ as a subset of $\bf{C}$. We also usually write $\mathit{0+bi}$ as just $bi$, and $\mathit{0+1i}$ as just $i$.
***

> #### 1.3: Properties of complex arithmetic
> - **Commutativity**:
>> $$\alpha + \beta = \beta + \alpha \text{ and } \alpha\beta = \beta\alpha \text{ for all } \alpha, \beta \in \bf{C};$$
> - **Associativity**:
> >$$(\alpha + \beta) + \lambda = \alpha + (\beta + \lambda) \text{ and }(\alpha\beta)\lambda = \alpha(\beta\lambda) \text{ for all }\alpha, \beta, \lambda \in \bf{C}; $$
> - **Identities**:
> >$$ \lambda + 0 = \lambda \text{ and } \lambda 1 = \lambda \text{ for all } \lambda \in \bf{C}.$$
> - **Additive Inverse**:
> >$$ \text{for every } \alpha \in \bf{C}, \text{ there exists a unique }\beta \in \bf{C} \text{ such that }\alpha + \beta = 0.$$
> - **Multiplicative Inverse**:
> >$$ \text{for every } \alpha \in \bf{C}\text{ with }\alpha \neq 0, \text{ there exists a unique }\beta \in \bf{C} \text{ such that }\alpha \beta = 1.$$
>  - **Distributive Property**:
> > $$ \lambda (\alpha + \beta) = \lambda \alpha + \lambda \beta \text{ for all } \lambda, \alpha, \beta \in \bf{C}.$$

***

The above properties define $\bf{R} \text{ and } \bf{C}$ to be **algebraic rings**.

***

> #### 1.5: Definition of complex subtraction / division
> Let $\alpha, \beta \in \bf{C}$. 
> - Let $-\alpha$ denote the **additive inverse** of $\alpha$. Thus, $-\alpha$ is the *unique* complex number such that:
> $$\alpha + (-\alpha = 0). $$
> - *Subtraction* on $\bf{C}$ is defined by:
> $$ \beta - \alpha = \beta + (-\alpha). $$
> - For $\alpha \neq 0$, let $\frac{1}{\alpha}$ denote the **multiplicative** inverse of $\alpha$. Thus $\frac{1}{\alpha}$ is the *unique* complex number such that:
> $$ \alpha \ (\frac{1}{\alpha}) = 1. $$
> - *Division* on $\bf{C}$ is defined by:
> $$\frac{\beta}{\alpha}= \beta (\frac{1}{\alpha}).  $$
***

These additional properties identify $\bf{C}$ as an algebraic **field**. The real numbers $\bf{R}$ form a field as well. So that we can easily make definitions and prove theorems that apply to both the real and complex numbers, we adopt the following notation:
***
> #### 1.6: Notation - Algebraic Fields
>  Throughout this book, we use $\bf{F}$ to denote both $\bf{R}$ and $\bf{C}$. 

***

This way, when we prove a theorem involving $\bf{F}$, we will know that it holds in both $\bf{R}$ and $\bf{C}$. 

Elements of $\bf{F}$ are called **scalars**. The word *scalar* refers to a number, as opposed to a vector. 

***

## Lists:

Before defining $R^n$ and $C^n$, consider two important examples:

> #### 1.7: Definition of $R^2$ and $R^3$
> - The set $\bf{R}^2$ defines a **plane**, and is the set of all *ordered pairs* of *real numbers*:
> > $$\bf{R}^2 = \{ (x,y): x, y \in \bf{R} \}.$$
> - The set $\bf{R}^3$ represents 3-dimensional space, with which we are familiar. It is the set of all *ordered triples* of *real numbers*:
> > $$\bf{R}^3 = \{(x,y,z):x,y,z \in \bf{R}\}.$$
***

To generalize $R^2$ and $R^3$ to higher dimensions, we need to discuss the concept of **lists**.

> #### 1.8: Definition of lists and length
> Suppose *n* is a nonnegative integer. A **list** of **length** *n* is an *ordered collection* of *n* elements (which may be numbers, other lists, or more abstract entities), separated by *commas* and surrounded by *parentheses*. A list of length *n* looks like this:
> > $$(x_1, x_2, \dots,x_n). $$ 

Two lists are equal if and only if they have the same length, with the same elements in the same order. 

Thus a list of length 2 is an ordered pair, and a list of length 3 is an ordered triple.

Many mathematicians refer to lists of length *n* as **n-tuples.** By definition, each **n-tuple** has a finite length that is a nonnegative integer. Thus an object like:

$$(x_1, x_2, \dots), $$

...which has infinite length, is not considered a list. 

A list of length zero looks like this:

$$(),$$

...and we consider such an object to be a list containing 0 elements to avoid trivial exceptions to theorems. 

Lists differ from **sets** in two major ways: in lists, *order* and *repetition* are both meaningful; in sets, both order and repetitions are irrelevant.


***

## Higher dimensions of $F$ :
To define the higher-dimensional analogues of $R^2$ and $R^3$, we will simply replace $R$ with $F$ (since $F = R$ or $C$), and replace n with an arbitrary positive integer. Specifically, we will fix a positive integer *n* for the remainder of this section. 

> ## 1.10: Definition of $F^n$
> $F^n$ is the set of all *lists* of length *n* of elements of $F:$
> $$\bf{F}^n = \{(x_1,\dots, x_n):x_j \in \bf{F} \text{ for } \mathit{j} = 1, \dots, \mathit{n} \, \} . $$
> For $(x_1,\dots,x_n) \in \bf{F}^n$ and $j \in \{1,\dots,n\}$, we say that $x_j$ is the $j^{th}$ **coordinate** of $(x_1,\dots,x_n)$.

If $\bf{F} = \bf{R}$ and $n = 2$ or 3, then this definition of $\bf{F}^n$ agrees with our previous notions of $\bf{R}^2$ and $\bf{R}^3$. 

> ## 1.11: Example
> $\bf{C}^4$ is the set of all lists of 4 complex numbers:
> >$\bf{C}^4 = \{(z_1,z_2,z_3,z_4):z_1,z_2,z_3,z_4 \in \bf{C}\}.$


If $n \geq 4$, we cannot visualize $\bf{R}^n$ geometrically. Similarly, $\bf{C}^1$ can be visualized as a plane, with two dimensions corresponding to the real and imaginary parts of a number - but for $n \geq 2$, the human mind cannot physically interpret $\bf{C}^n$. However, even if *n* is large, we can perform algebraic manipulations in $\bf{F}^n$ just as easily as in $\bf{R}^2$ and $\RRiii$. For example, addition in $\FFn$ is defined as follows:

> ## 1.12: Definition of addition in $\FFn$
> **Addition** in $\FFn$ is defined by adding corresponding coordinates:
> $$(x_1,\dots,x_n)\,+\,(y_1,\dots,y_n) = (x_1 + y_1,\dots,x_n+y_n).$$

Often the mathematics of $\FFn$ becomes cleaner if we use a *single letter* to denote a list of *n* numbers, without explicitly writing the coordinates. The result below, for example, is stated with *x* and *y* in $\FFn$, where *x* and *y* both represent a list of *n* numbers (though the explicit lists are required for the proof).

> ## 1.13: Commutativity of addition in $\FFn$
> If $x,y \in \FFn$, then $x+y=y+x$.
> >**Proof**: Suppose $x = (x_1,\dots,x_n)$ and $y =(y_1,\dots,y_n)$. Then:
> >$$\begin{align} x + y & = (x_1,\dots,x_n)+(y_1,\dots,y_n)\\
& = (x_1 + y_1, \dots, x_n+y_n) &&\text{by definition}\\
& = (y_1 + x_1, \dots, y_n + x_n) &&\text{usual commutivity in $\FF$}\\ 
& = (y_1,\dots, y_n) + (x_, \dots, x_n)&&\text{definition of addition in $\FFn$}\\ 
& =y + x.\end{align}$$



If a single letter is used to denote an element of $\FFn$, then the same letter (with appropriate subscripts) is often used when coordinates must be displayed. For example, if $x \in \FFn$, then letting *x* equal $(x_1,\dots,x_n)$ is good notation. Working with just *x* and avoiding explicit coordinates is often better. 
***

> ## 1.14: Definition of the Zero List
> Let 0 denote the list of length *n* whose coordinates are all equal to zero:
> $$0 = (0,\dots, 0). $$

Here the symbol 0 is used in two different ways: the zero on the left of the equality is a list of length *n*, where each 0 within the list on the right is the number zero. Which meaning is intended should usually be clear from context. 

<svg version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 508.8569594503939 541.277918884065" width="508.8569594503939" height="541.277918884065">
  <!-- svg-source:excalidraw -->
  
  <defs>
    <style>
      @font-face {
        font-family: "Virgil";
        src: url("https://excalidraw.com/Virgil.woff2");
      }
      @font-face {
        font-family: "Cascadia";
        src: url("https://excalidraw.com/Cascadia.woff2");
      }
    </style>
  </defs>
  <rect x="0" y="0" width="508.8569594503939" height="541.277918884065" fill="#ffffff"></rect><g stroke-linecap="round"><g transform="translate(9.92847972519695 509.9251075167209) rotate(0 237.46493963412945 2.401079060509801)"><path d="M1 -1.07 C80.33 -0.24, 395.66 5.07, 474.86 5.88 M0.07 0.98 C79.29 1.4, 394.34 3.65, 473.63 4.23" stroke="#000000" stroke-width="1" fill="none"></path></g></g><g stroke-linecap="round"><g transform="translate(39.8569594503939 39) rotate(0 -0.07498485214077277 246.31024580975995)"><path d="M0.26 0.91 C0.57 82.56, 0.79 409.05, 0.92 490.83 M-1.07 0.34 C-0.75 82.11, 0.14 410.74, 0.45 492.28" stroke="#000000" stroke-width="1" fill="none"></path></g></g><g transform="translate(33.8569594503939 10) rotate(0 4.5 12.5)"><text x="0" y="18" font-family="Virgil, Segoe UI Emoji" font-size="20px" fill="#000000" text-anchor="start" style="white-space: pre;" direction="ltr">y</text></g><g transform="translate(487.8569594503939 500) rotate(0 5.5 12.5)"><text x="0" y="18" font-family="Virgil, Segoe UI Emoji" font-size="20px" fill="#000000" text-anchor="start" style="white-space: pre;" direction="ltr">x</text></g><g stroke-linecap="round"><g transform="translate(131.64271958779545 382.5) rotate(0 70 -75.5)"><path d="M0 0 C43.12 -46.51, 86.25 -93.03, 140 -151 M0 0 C32.27 -34.8, 64.54 -69.61, 140 -151" stroke="#5f3dc4" stroke-width="2" fill="none"></path></g></g><g stroke-linecap="round"><g transform="translate(257.64271958779545 233.5) rotate(0 7 -1.5)"><path d="M0 0 C4.78 -1.03, 9.57 -2.05, 14 -3 M0 0 C5.25 -1.12, 10.49 -2.25, 14 -3" stroke="#5f3dc4" stroke-width="2" fill="none"></path></g></g><g stroke-linecap="round"><g transform="translate(274.64271958779545 240.5) rotate(0 -1 -5)"><path d="M0 0 C-0.49 -2.46, -0.98 -4.92, -2 -10 M0 0 C-0.48 -2.38, -0.95 -4.75, -2 -10" stroke="#5f3dc4" stroke-width="2" fill="none"></path></g></g></svg>