# 2.7 - Relativistic Dynamics:	

^51a1a3

***

Einstein's postulates led to a new *relative* interpretation of previously absolute concepts such as *length* and *time*, and through *relativistic velocity addition*, the classical conception of **absolute velocity** is clearly no longer valid. It is reasonable to ask, then, how far this revolution will go in changing our interpretation of physical concepts. Dynamical quantities, such as *momentum* and *kinetic energy*, are dependent on length, time, and velocity. Do classical laws of momentum/energy conservation remain valid in the relativistic world? 

***

## Relativistic Momentum:

It turns out that if a collision between particles is observed in two different frames, one in relative motion to the other, the rules of [[2.4 - Consequences of Einstein's Postulates|velocity addition]] produce an interesting result: momentum is conserved in $O'$, but *not* in $O$.

The collision experiments show that the **law of the conservation of linear momentum**, with momentum defined as $\vec p = m \vec v$, does not satisfy [[2.3 - Einstein's Postulates#^709a15|Einstein's first postulate]]. We cannot have a law that is valid in some frames, but not for others. Therefore, *if we are to retain the conservation of momentum as a general law consistent with Einstein's first postulate, we must create a new definition for momentum.* 

This new definition of momentum must have two properties: 

1. It must yield a conservation law that satisfies the **principle of relativity**; that is, momentum must be conserved for all observers in all frames.
2. At low speeds, it must reduce to $\vec p = m \vec v$, which works perfectly well for nonrelativistic cases. 

These requirements are satisfied by defining the **relativistic momentum** for a particle of mass *m* moving with velocity $\vec v$ as:


> ### $$\mathbf{ \vec p} = \frac{m \vec{v}}{\sqrt{1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}}} = \gamma m\vec v.  $$
> ...where $v^2$ in the denominator is $v^2 = v_x^2 + v_y^2 + v_z^2$, the velocity of the *particle* as measured in a particular reference frame - *not* the velocity of the frame itself!

In terms of components:

> ## $$p_x = \gamma m v_x,\qquad p_y = \gamma m v_y, \qquad p_z = \gamma m v_z. $$

With this new definition of momentum, the **law of conservation of relativistic momentum** now holds:

> ## $$p_i = p_f. $$


___

## Relativistic Kinetic Energy:

If we examine the kinetic energy in our collision experiment, another problem emerges - a collision that is inelastic in one frame may be elastic in another, which clearly cannot occur. As with momentum, we must derive a new expression for kinetic energy that is consistent with the principles of relativity. 

If we assume that the work-energy theorem still holds for the relativistic world, we can find:

> ### $$\Delta K = W = \int F\,dx, \, \text{where}\; F = \frac{dp}{dt}. \text{Recalling that}\;\vec p = \gamma m \vec v... $$
> 
> ## $$K = \gamma\, m c^2 - mc^2 = (\gamma - 1)\,mc^2.$$

***

## Relativistic Total and Rest Energy:

We can also write the kinetic energy above as:

> ## $$K = E - E_0 $$
...where *E* is the* total energy* ($E = \gamma mc^2$) and $E_0$ is the **rest energy**. 

The **rest energy** $E_0$ of a particle is, in effect, the total relativistic energy of a particle measured in a frame of reference in which that particle is at rest (such that $K = 0$). It is defined as:

> ## $$E_0 = mc^2. $$

Thus, the relativistic total energy is:

> ## $$E = K + E_0 $$

...which can be usefully rewritten as:


> ## $$E = \sqrt{(pc)^2+(mc^2)^2}. $$

***
Some other useful relations:

For a *massless* particle such as a **photon**: 

> ## $$E = pc. $$


For particles with mass:

> ## $$m = \frac{E_0}{c^2}. $$

***

#physics #modern_physics #relativity #special_relativity #lorentz_transform #energy #momentum 