# 3.2 - The Photoelectric Effect:
***

The **photoelectric effect** was the first of three experiments that demonstrated the shortcomings of the wave theory of light. When a metal surface is illuminated with light, **electrons** can be *emitted from  the surface*. This phenomenon was discovered by Heinrich Hertz in $1887_{CE}$. The electrons emitted in this process are called **photoelectrons**. 

***

A successful quantum theory of the photoelectric effect was proposed in $1905_{CE}$ by Albert Einstein. Five years earlier, in $1900_{CE}$, the German physicist Max Planck had developed a theory to explain the wavelength distribution of light emitted by *hot glowing objects* (called [[3.3 - Thermal Radiation|thermal radiation]]). Based partly on Planck's ideas, Einstein proposed that the energy of electromagnetic radiation is *not* continuously distributed over the wavefront, but instead is *concentrated* in localized bundles called **quanta**, which are also known as **photons**. The energy of a photon associated with an electromagnetic wave of frequency *f* is:

> ## $$E = h f $$

....where *h* is a proportionality constant known as **Planck's constant**. The photon energy can also be related to the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave by substituting $f = c/\lambda$, which gives:

> ## $$E = \frac{hc}{\lambda}. $$


We often speak about photons as if they are particles, and as *concentrated bundles of energy*, they do have particle-like properties. Like the electromagnetic waves, photons travel at the speed of light *c*, and so they must obey the relativistic relationship $p = E/c$.  Combining these two equations, we find:

> ## $$p = \frac{h}{\lambda}.$$

Photons carry linear momentum as well as energy, and thus they share this characteristic property of particles. 

Because a photon travels at the speed of light, it must have zero mass - otherwise, its energy and momentum would both be infinite, which doesn't make sense. Similarly, a photon's **rest energy** $E_0 = mc^2$ *must also be zero*.

In Einstein's interpretation of the photoelectric effect, a **photoelectron** is released as the result of an interaction with a *single photon*. If the photon energy *hf* is greater than the **work function** $\phi$ of the material, the photoelectron will be released. If the photon energy is less than the work function, the photoelectric effect will not occur. 

If the photon energy $hf$ exceeds the work function, the excess energy appears directly as the kinetic energy of the photoelectron:

> ## $$K_{max} = hf - \phi. $$

***