	# 1.1 - Definitions and Terminology:
***

The words **differential** and **equation** suggest the solving of some sort of equation containing derivatives. Before we start solving anything, however, let's discuss some of the basic definitions and terminology of the subject. 

***

## A Definition:
The derivative $dy/dx$ of some function $y = \phi(x)$ is itself *another function*, $\phi '(x)$, found by an appropriate rule. 

For example, the function $y = e^{0.1x^2}$ is **differentiable** on the interval $(-\infty,\infty)$, and its derivative is $dy/dx = 0.2xe^{0.1x^2}$ If we substitute the term $e^{0.1x^2}$ in the previous equation by $y$, as per the definition, we are left with:

> ## $$\frac{dy}{dx}=0.2xy. $$

Now, imagine you are handed the above **differential equation**, without knowing how it was constructed. How can we tell what function is represented by $y$?

This is one of the central problems in a course on differential equations: *How can we solve such an equation for the unknown function* $y = \phi(x)$?

The problem is loosely equivalent to the familiar reverse problem in differential calculus: given a certain derivative, find an **antiderivative**.

Before proceeding any further, let's state more precisely the definition of a differential equation:

> An equation containing the derivatives of one or more dependent variables, with respect to one or more independent variables, is called a **differential equation**.

In discussing differential equations, we will classify them by **type**, **order**, and **linearity**. 

***

## Classification by Type:

If a differential equation contains only *ordinary* derivatives of one or more functions with respect to a *single independent variable*, it is said to be an **ordinary differential equation (ODE)**. An equation involving only partial derivatives of one or more function of *two or more independent variables* is called a **partial differential equation (PDE)**. 

> The equations
> ### $$\frac{dy}{dx} + 6y = e^{-x},\quad\frac{d^2y}{dx^2}+ \frac{dy}{dx} - 12y = 0,\;\text{and}$$
> ### $$\frac{dx}{dt} + \frac{dy}{dt} = 3x + 2y $$
> ...are examples of **ordinary differential equations**. 

Note that in the third example, the ODE contains more than one dependent variable!

> The equations
> ### $$\frac{\partial^2 d}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial y^2} = 0,\quad \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2} = \frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t^2} - \frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t},\quad \text{and} $$
> ### $$\frac{\partial u}{\partial y} = -\frac{\partial v}{\partial x}. $$	

Note that in the third equation, there are *two dependent variables* and *two independent* variables in the PDE. This indicates that *u* and *v* must both be functions of two or more variables. 

***

## Classification by Order:

The **order** of a differential equation (ordinary or partial) is the order of the *highest derivative in the equation*. For example:

> The differential equations
> #### $$\frac{d^2y}{dx^2}+5\left(\frac{dy}{dx}\right)^3 - 4y = e^x,\quad 2\frac{\partial^4 u}{\partial x^4} + \frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t^2} = 0	 $$
> ...are **second-order** and **fourth-order** ordinary and partial differential equations, respectively.

***

### Differential Form of a First-Order ODE:

Assume that $y$ is the dependent variable in a first-order ODE. Recall that the **differential** $dy$ is defined to be:

> ## $$dy = y'dx. $$