# 12.4 - The Nuclear Force:
***

We used the simplest atom, hydrogen, to gain insight into atomic structure - likewise, we can learn more about nuclear structure and the nuclear force by examining the simplest structure in which that force operates: the deuterium nucleus, which consists of only one proton and one neutron.

We might hope to learn something about the nuclear force from the photons emitted in transitions between the excited states of the deuterium nucleus. Unfortunately, this strategy fails, because **deuterium has no no excited states**. When we bring a proton and an electron together to form a hydrogen atom, many photons may be emitted as the electron drops into its ground state; from this spectrum, we can learn the energies of the excited states. 

When we bring a proton and a neutron together to form a deuterium nucleus, however, only one photon (of energy 2.224 *MeV*) is emitted as the system *drops directly into its ground state*.

Even though we can't use the excited states of deuterium, we can learn about the nuclear force in proton-neutron systems by scattering neutrons from protons (and other useful experiments). 

From these experiments, we have learned the following characteristics of the nuclear force:

1. The nuclear force is the *strongest* of the four known forces, and so it is sometimes called the **strong force**. For two adjacent protons in a nucleus, the nuclear interaction is 10-100 times stronger than the repulsive electromagnetic force. 
2. The strong nuclear force *has a very short range* - the distance over which the force acts is limited to about $10^{-15}$*m*.

	- This conclusion follows from the constant central density of nuclear matter, which was discussed in [[12.2 - Nuclear Sizes and Shapes|the previous section]]. As we add nucleons to a nucleus, each added nucleon only experiences a force from its nearest neighbours: *not* from all the other nucleons in the nucleus. 
	- In this respect, a nucleus behaves somewhat like a *crystal*, in which each atom interacts only with its nearest neighbors, and additional atoms increase the size of the crystal but do not alter its density. 
	- This is not typical of longer-range forces, like the electrostatic repulsion between protons in a nucleus. For example, because each of the *Z* protons in a nucleus feels the repulsive force of the other $Z-1$ protons, the total electrostatic energy of the nucelus is proportional to $Z(Z-1)$. ^d7e83c

3. The nuclear force between any two nucleons does not depend 	on whether said nucleons are protons or neutrons - the ** *n-p* nuclear force** is the same as the ** *n-n* nuclear force**, which in turn is the same as the nuclear portion of the ** *p-p* nuclear force**.


***

A successful model for the origin of this short-range force is the **exchange force**. Suppose we have a proton and a neutron next to one another in the nucleus. The neutron *emits a particle*, on which it exerts a strong *attractive force*. The proton also exerts a strong force on the particle that may be be strong enough to *absorb* the particle. The proton will then emit a particle that can be absorbed by the neutron. The proton and neutron each exert a strong force on the exchanged particle, and thus they appear to exert a strong force *on each other*. 


	
An immediate question comes to mind: How can a neutron of rest energy $m_nc^2$ emit a particle of rest energy $mc^2$ and still remain a neutron, without violating conservation of energy? 

The answer to this question can be found from the **uncertainty principle**, $\Delta E \Delta t \sim \hbar$. We don't know that energy has been conserved unless we measure it, and we can't measure it more accurately than the uncertainty $\Delta E$ in a time interval $\Delta t$. We can therefore *"violate" energy conservation* by an amount $\Delta E$ for a time interval of *at most* $\Delta t = \frac{\hbar}{\Delta E}$.

The amount by which energy conservation is violated in our exchange force model is $mc^2$, the rest energy of the exchanged particle. By the uncertainty principle, this particle *can only exist for a time interval of at most:*

>## $$ \Delta t = \frac{\hbar}{mc^2}.$$

The longest distance this particle can possibly travel in this time is $x = c\Delta t$, since the particle is not permitted to travel faster than light. With $x = c\Delta t = c \hbar / mc^2$, we thern have a relationship between the **maximum range of the exchange force** and the rest energy of the exchanged particle: 

>## $$ mc^2 = \frac{\hbar c}{x}.$$

If we insert into this expression an estimate for the range of the nuclear force (~1*fm*), we can estimate the rest energy of this exchanged particle as **~200*MeV***.

The exchanged particle cannot, in principle, be observed in the laboratory during the exchange, for to do so would violate energy conservation. However, if we provide energy to the nucleons from an external source (eg. by causing the nucleus to absorb a photon), the "borrowed" energy can be repaid, and we can observe the particle.

When we carry out this experiment, the nucleus is found to emit *pi mesons*, also known as **pions**, with a rest energy of 140*MeV*, which is remarkably close to our estimate of 200*MeV*.

Many observable properties of the nuclear force have been successfully explained by a model based on pions (though this is not the whole story - other particles have been found as well).

***

#physics #modern_physics #nuclei #uncertainty
