# PHYS449 Assignment 8
### Max Stronge (30064749)

***

## 3. Magnetic spin system 

Consider two isolated systems of non-interacting spins with $N_{A}= 16$ and $N_{B} = 4$ spins, respectively. Each spin has a magnetic moment $\mu$ that can point either up or down. The energies are simply the sums over the oriented magnetic moments and the initial energies are $E_{A}=-2\mu$ and $E_{B}=-2\mu$. 

1. What is the total number of microstates available to the composite system?
2. If the two systems are now allowed to exchange energy with one another, what is the probability that system $A$ has energy $E_{A}$? 
3. What is the mean value $\langle{E_A}\rangle$? 

**Solutions:**


**a)** The systems:

```tikz
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzpicture}
		\draw[thick] (-4,-1) -- (-4,4);
		\draw[thick] (-4,4) -- (4,4);
		\draw[thick] (4,4) -- (4,-1);
		\draw[thick] (4,-1) -- (-4,-1);
		\draw[thick] (0,4) -- (0,-1);
		
		\node at (-2, 3.5) {\LARGE $\mathbf{A}$};
		\node at (2, 3.5) {\LARGE $\mathbf{B}$};
		\node at (-2,2) {\large $E_{A_{i}}=-2\mu$};
		\node at (2,2) {\large $E_{B_{i}}=-2\mu$};

		\node at (-2,0.5) {\large $N_{A}=16$};
		\node at (2,0.5) {\large $N_{B}=4$};

	\end{tikzpicture}
\end{document}
```


Because the spin can be either up or down, the number of possible microstates for system $A$ is $\OO_{A} = 2^{N_{A}}=2^{16}$, and the number of possible microstates for system $B$ is $\OO_{B}= 2^{N_{B}}=2^{4}$.  

However, not all of these microstates are consistent with the information given regarding the energy of each respective system. There are 16 spins of $\pm\frac{1}{2}$ each within the confines of system $A$. For $E_{A}$ to be $-2\mu$, there must be exactly 4 excess spins in a down configuration - all the other spins must be balanced in order to retain conservation of energy.  Thus we can identify the macrostate of system $A$ associated with energy $E_{A_{i}}$ as that which has 
$n_{\uparrow}= 6, n_\downarrow = 10$.

The *allowable* microstates of $A$ are those that are consistent with this distribution of spins. The number of possible configurations satisfying this constraint can be found

$$\OO_{A\text{, allowable}}=\mqty( 16 \\ 10)=8008$$
Similarly, for system $B$ to have $E_{i}=-2\mu$, all 4 spins must be down, with none up. Consequently, there is exactly one allowable microstate consistent with the given energy macrostate.

Therefore, the number of allowable microstates in the combined system is 

$\OO = \OO_{A} + \OO_{B} = 8008\times 1 = 8008.$

All $8008$ of these microstates are equally probable.


**b)** If the two systems are allowed to exchange energy, the two closed systems now act as one isolated system, and energy can be exchanged between $A$ and $B$ so long as the total energy of system $AB$ is conserved at $E_{A}+E_{B}=-4\mu$. We will call this new total energy $E_{0}$. 

When the two systems are brought together, they will exchange energy in such a way as to maximize the total number of microstates for the composite system (i.e. maximize the entropy). Since the combined system remains isolated to surroundings, the total energy must be equal to $-4\mu$. Thus there must be 8 excess down spins in order for this charge to be satisfied, with 20 spins total in the composite system, leaving 6 spins each in the up and down configuration:

$$n_{\uparrow}= 6, n_\downarrow = 14.$$

The various possible configurations are as follows:

- All 4 spins in $B$ down $\implies$ 10 down, 6 up in $A$. 
	- Since $B$ has one allowable microstate, that leaves us in the exact same situation, and clearly not the equilibrium state. With $\OO=8008$, the entropy is given by $S=k\ln\OO \implies S_{B4A10}=S=\frac{1.24095\times10^{22}\text{J}}{\text{K}}$ .
- $B:3\downarrow \implies A:11\downarrow,5\uparrow$ :
	- There are now $4$ allowable microstates for system $B$ and $\mqty(16 \\ 11)=4368$ allowable microstates for system $A$. This results in $$\OO=4\times4368=17472$$ microstates for the composite system, which will correspond to a higher entropy than the first situation.
- $B:2\downarrow \implies A: 12\downarrow,4\uparrow$ :
	- Now, $\OO_{B}=6,\OO_{A}= 1820, \implies \OO=10920$
	- Cannot be equilibrium state
- $B=1\downarrow\implies A:13\downarrow,3\uparrow$ :
	- $\OO_{B}= 4,\OO_{A}=560,\OO = 2240.$
	- This is also lower entropy so cannot be equilibrium state
- $B:0\downarrow\implies A:14\downarrow,2\uparrow$
	- $\OO_B=1,\OO_{A}=120,\OO=120$
	- Cannot be equilibrium state

So we have found that the equilibrium macrostate is that which has $3$ spins down. This exhausts the possible macrostates (and possible microstates) that are allowable given the energy constraints - there are $120+2240+10920+17472+8008=\OO=38760$ total microstates available to the compound system. There are $14876$ available microstates for $A$.

The first of the above cases with $\OO=8008$ is the case in which system $A$ has energy $E_{A}$: the probability of such a configuration is given in terms of $\OO$: 


$$P_{A}(E_{A})=\frac{\OO_A(E_A)\OO_B(E_{0}-E_{A})}{\OO}=\frac{8008 \ (1)}{38760}=0.206605.$$


**c)** We can find the mean energy of subsystem $A$ by doing an ensemble average over the $14876$ allowable microstates:

In the case of $B:4\downarrow$, $A$ has $8008$ equally likely microstates all with an energy of $E_{A}=-2\mu$, leading to $-2\mu (\frac{8008}{14876})$ as the term for the first case.

for $B:3\downarrow$, $A$ has $4368$ equally likely microstates with energy $E_{A}=-3\mu.$

$$-3\mu \qty(\frac{4368}{14876})$$

Carrying on in this way for all the possible cases, we have for the mean value

$$\begin{align*}
\langle{E_{A}\rangle}&= -2\mu (\frac{8008}{14876}) -3\mu \qty(\frac{4368}{14876})-4\mu \qty(\frac{1820}{14876} )-5\mu \qty\left(\frac{560}{14876}\right)-6\mu\qty(\frac{120}{14876})

\\
&= -\mu \left( 2\frac{8008}{14876}+3\frac{4368}{14876}+4\frac{1820}{14876}+5\frac{560}{14876}+6\frac{120}{14876}\right)

\\

&= -2.68352\mu.

\end{align*}$$


***