# The Explicit Modernity of Fascism

**Thesis**: Fascism as a political and historical phenomenon is explicitly and intrinsically modern, and cannot exist before the development of both industrial technology and the concept of the nation-state. 

___

## Notes:

- Various definitions of fascism with a range of scopes (from only Mussolini to any military authoritarian state) - favorite and most-used is Roger Griffin's:
	- per Griffin, fascism is a form of 'palingenetic ultranationalism', with palingenetic meaning a rebirth/recreation of a historical age of glory which may/may not have existed
	- i.e. the characteristic feature of fascism is the development of a political narrative to justify that palingenesis and establish a national revolution
- argument is that the features of fascism make it an inherently modern ideology - certain social innovations took place that enabled it, i.e. widespread literacy, mass communications, mass politics in general 

- Main analytical angle for paper: what differentiated the 'true' fascist states of the 20th century (Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany) from the 'proto-fascist' states of the 19th century (Imperial Russia, France under Napoleon III)

- some parts had historical antecedents, i.e. the parts not dependent on modern mass politics (extreme reactionary conservatism, nationalism, authoritarianism) - clearest example likely Imperial Russia under Tsar Nicholas I
	- The Russian state ideology was known as Official Nationality, w. three tenets 'Orthodoxy, autocracy, and nationality'
	- autocratic control by the Tsar, also had a narrative of national humiliation (subjugation by the Golden Horde)
		-  conquering of Siberia == lebensraum 
		- also used racial justification (superiority of Orthodox russians) and legacy of imperial rome / byzantium as they were the dominant Orthodox Christian state - fixation on rome similar to Mussolini's italy

- the key difference between the late Romanov state and later regimes which 



- "According to this theory, the one
underlying development of recent history is the displacement of traditional societies by an unprecedentedly thorough and rapid process of change...involving industrialization, urbanization, secularization, and rationalization." - Turner, Fascism and Modernization





# Structure:

1. Introduction
	1. Establish the lack of universal definition of fascism - like many other political phenomena it is often defined by its opponents/critics
	2. Roger Griffin's definition most operationally useful - 'palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism' 
		1. per Griffin, fascism is a form of 'palingenetic ultranationalism', with palingenetic meaning a rebirth/recreation of a historical age of glory which may/may not have existed
		2. Political theorist Roger Griffin, a specialist in the study of fascism, defined it as “a genus of political ideology whose mythic core...is a palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism” (2016, p. 117) Some further explanations of Griffin’s terminology become necessary in this context. Palingenetic, deriving from the Greek palin (renewed, again) and genesis (born, created), is used in a variety of contexts to refer to the long-awaited return of some state of affairs. Usage of the term is often religious in nature. The promised last judgement in Christian theology is possibly the most notable example of palingenetic myth: Jesus himself is quoted as having used the Greek “palingenesia” (Matthew 19:28). Griffin uses it here in a strictly secular sense, applying it to a political ideology, both populist and ultranationalist in nature.
		- i.e. the characteristic feature of fascism is the development of a political narrative to justify that palingenesis and establish a national revolution
	1. Thesis: an additional demarcation factor, beyond Griffin's definition: fascist states are intrinsically and explicitly modern, and the criteria laid out by Griffin only equate to fascism after the nineteenth century

3. Fascist Contradictions and Historical proto-Fascism
	1. The only two universally accepted fascist states in history are Fascist Italy under Mussolini (from which the term fascism is derived) and Nazi Germany under Hitler
	2. Some definitions of fascism include many more (Francoist Spain, for example) and some are even more restrictive to only exclusively use the term for Italian fascism, considering Nazism to be an entirely distinct historical phenomena
	3. Regardless of definition, for the two 'consensus' fascist states, the addition of modernity to the demarcation criteria may seem paradoxical, or even contradictory - both of them were overtly critical of 'modernism/modernization'
	4. "In their eyes, modern industrial society was wholly and unavoidably incompatible with what they held to be the only true wellspring of social life: the folk culture" (Turner, Henry Ashby. “Fascism and Modernization.”)
	5. This was however more of a rhetorical hatred than a practical one - incorportate this quote into the argument: "This seeming paradox has puzzled a good many observers, but there is a simple explanation. How, after all, was it possible to obtain vast stretches of Lebensraum for the purpose of de-urbanizing and de-industrializing Germany in the mid-twentieth century other than by conquest? And how was such conquest possible except by resort to a vast industrial war machine?"
	6. These apparent contradictions were considered by the historian and theorist Jeffrey Herf, who coined the term 'reactionary modernism' to describe the apparently contradictory attitude of nazi ideologues to modernity: they rejected Enlightenment rationalism/liberalism but embraced modern technology
	7. Their hatred of modernism in the artistic sphere resulted in the closure of the bauhaus, which 'obscured the degree to which the nazi regime actively embraced modernity'
4. Fascist Contradictions and Modernization
	2. make general arguments of how several social and technological revolutions enabled the existence of the prototypical fascist state as we understand it
		1. development of the nation-state as a meaningful unified concept is a necessary precondition for nationalism - the earliest possible fascist state must be post-Westphalian, mid 17th century
		2. urbanization+widespread literacy enable mass movement politics
		3. communication technology (print, newspaper, radio) enabled the use of mass propaganda, particularly in the case of Nazi Germany
	3. All of these core traits must be in place prior to the inception of either of the characteristic fascist states, or their character would be dramatically altered
5. The temporal character of Italian fascism
	1. Use quotes from Mussolini's Doctrine of Fascism to explain the explicitly  temporal nature of fascism in the words of the man who did more than anyone else to define it
	2. "If every age has its own characteristic doctrine, there are a thousand signs that point to Fascism as the characteristic doctrine of our time....Fascism has henceforth in the world the universality of all those doctrines which, in realizing themselves, have represented a stage in the history of the human spirit." this quote used by Mussolini to close The Doctrine of Fascism is an affirmation of the concept that fascism as a political ideology is not detached from history but sees itself as embedded within it, in a specific historical context


**References:**

- Griffin, Roger. _The Nature of Fascism  / Roger Griffin._ London: Pinter, 1991.
- Turner, Henry Ashby. “Fascism and Modernization.” _World Politics_ 24, no. 4 (1972): 547–64. https://doi.org/10.2307/2010456.
- Herf, Jeffrey. “Reactionary Modernism: Some Ideological Origins of the Primacy of Politics in the Third Reich.” _Theory and Society_ 10, no. 6 (1981): 805–32. http://www.jstor.org/stable/657334.
- Mussolini, Benito. _Fascism: Doctrine and Institutions_. Rome: “Ardita,” 1935.
- Kershaw, Ian. “Hitler and the Uniqueness of Nazism.” _Journal of Contemporary History_ 39, no. 2 (2004): 239–54. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3180723.
- Popper, K. R. (1945). The Open Society and Its Enemies. New York: Routledge.
- Plato. (1968). The Republic. (Bloom, A. trans.)  New York: Basic Books.
- Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf (Boston, 1939), 318. Cited in Eberhard Jickel, Hitler's World View: A Blueprint for Power, trans. Herbert Arnold (Cambridge, Mass., 1981), 90.
- Antliff, Mark. “Fascism, Modernism, and Modernity.” _The Art Bulletin_ 84, no. 1 (2002): 148–69. https://doi.org/10.2307/3177257.
- Pain, Emil. “The Imperial Syndrome and Its Influence on Russian Nationalism.” In _The New Russian Nationalism: Imperialism, Ethnicity and Authoritarianism 2000–2015_, edited by Pål Kolstø and Helge Blakkisrud, 46–74. Edinburgh University Press, 2016. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.3366/j.ctt1bh2kk5.9.


____

Final draft:

# The Explicit Modernity of Fascism

Like much of the nomenclature of the social sciences, the notion of fascism has eluded a unanimous definition. In contemporary discussion the term's use has become increasingly frequent, sometimes referring to anything perceived as reactionary or authoritarian. This overextension leads to a dilution of the term to the extent that it may lose its meaning in being attributed to too wide a variety of historical phenomena, potentially going back thousands of years. Karl Popper argued that the historical interpretation of Plato is overly benign, and that his hypothetical Republic is, in fact, a totalitarian dictatorship - a claim that, while unusual at first glance, has some grounding. [popper-citation] Plato's Republic relied on a strict assignment of roles and responsibilities in society on the part of an all-powerful state, through a system of propagandized education that would be welcome in any totalitarian dictatorship. Each citizen is to be instructed from an early age that “the god, in fashioning those of you who are competent to rule, mixed gold in at their birth…in auxiliaries, silver; and iron and bronze in the farmers and other craftsmen”. [Plato-citation] This hierarchical, tripartite division of society echoes that laid out by Hitler himself in Mein Kampf, assigning Aryans, the Japanese, and Jews as the founders, bearers, and destroyers of culture, respectively. [hitler-citation] The argument could be made that, with the definition applied so loosely, fascist characteristics were to be found even in Ancient Greece - at the other extreme, however, there are those that prefer a particularly narrow definition, reserving the label of 'fascism' exclusively for the Italian flavor that gave rise to the term itself. English historian Ian Kershaw has (at times) been sympathetic to this camp, making the argument that "...the singular, the unique in nazism, remains more important...than what it has in common with other movements or regimes". [kershaw-citation] While there is no (and likely never will be) agreement as to the strict rules for delineating a fascist state, there is some degree of consensus between these extrema. The majority of historians and social scientists will near-unanimously agree on two examples of fascist states - the prototypical fascist state of Italy under Mussolini, and Nazi Germany under Hitler. 

Clearly there is not one definition that will universally diagnose fascism from generic authoritarianism, but several. One of the more operationally useful definitions comes from political theorist Roger Griffin, who defined it as “a genus of political ideology whose mythic core...is a palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism” [griffin-citation] Palingenetic, deriving from the Greek *palin* (renewed, again) and *genesis* (born, created), is used in a variety of contexts to refer to the long-awaited return of some idyllic state of affairs. Usage of the term is often religious in origin. The promised Last Judgement in Christian theology is possibly the most notable example of palingenetic myth: Christ himself is quoted as having used the Greek “παλιγγενεσία” ('palingenesia', Matthew 19:28) to describe 'the regeneration'. Griffin uses it here in a strictly secular sense, applying it to a political ideology, both populist and ultranationalist in nature. This definition, while widely accepted, can also be argued to be overly inclusive (after all, Plato / Socrates allegedly lamented the invention of writing, and wished for a return to a time when youth would rely on their memory). This paper contends that an additional criterion is needed for the demarcation of true fascism from its proto-forms: the inherent and explicit modernity of the ideology. True fascism, as argued here, is a distinctly modern phenomenon, only truly emerging in the early 19th century, with the advent of certain societal and technological transformations and as a reaction to certain historical trends. The identification and examination of this modernity criterion offers a more precise understanding of fascism, differentiating it from historical states that may share certain ideological traits but lack the essential modern context that characterizes true fascist states.

Griffin's demarcation criteria clearly apply to both of the characteristic examples of fascist states. In Nazi Germany, the palingenetic myth was centered around the idea of a pure, racially superior Aryan society, comprised of 'the Greek spirit and Germanic technology'. [hitler-citation] This mythic past, glorified in Nazi ideology and iconography, was seen as a golden era of racial purity and Germanic supremacy, uncorrupted by external influences. Hitler laid the foundation for this narrative in Mein Kampf, envisioning a racially homogeneous and dominant Aryan race that was destined to rule over others. The Nazis blamed the Jews, Bolsheviks, and trade unionists for the perceived degradation of German society. They were held responsible for Germany’s defeat in World War I, the economic hardships of the Weimar Republic, and the perceived moral decay within German culture. This narrative of a lost utopian past and a present tarnished by a conspiratorial enemy galvanized the German population, fueling the ultranationalist fervor that propelled the Nazi party to power.

Fascist Italy also embraced a form of palingenetic ultranationalism, albeit with a different historical focus. Mussolini’s fascist regime sought to revive the glory of the Roman Empire, envisioning a modern Italy that mirrored the power, prestige, and territorial extent of ancient Rome. This narrative of national rebirth was rooted in the belief that Italy had been marginalized and weakened in the aftermath of the Roman Empire’s fall, and that the nation was overdue for a resurgence to its former greatness. The enemies, in this narrative, were multifarious: internal political dissenters, such as socialists and communists, who were seen as corrupting influences on Italian society, and external forces, particularly the Western powers, which were viewed as having subjugated and exploited Italy, preventing its rightful ascent to greatness. By invoking the imagery and symbolism of ancient Rome, as well as humiliation in the face of failed colonization efforts in Ethiopia, Mussolini aimed to instill a sense of pride and destiny among Italians, rallying them behind his vision of a renewed, powerful Italy leading the world.

Both of these mass movements were unique responses to the historical context that began as cultural movement before assuming political power. The character of each is so intertwined with the notion of modernity that disentangling them from the explicitly modern, 20th-century conditions that created them would render them unrecognizable. Modern, in this context, is taken to be those technological, social, and cultural elements that pertain to the theory of 'modernization', the notion that "the one underlying development of recent history is the displacement of traditional societies by an unprecedentedly thorough and rapid process of change...involving industrialization, urbanization, secularization, and rationalization." [turner-citation]. It may seem paradoxical to to associate fascism, particularly Nazi Germany, with modernity, given that they were overtly critical of modernism as an artistic and political movement. Nazi ideologues went as far as to claim that "modern industrial society was wholly and unavoidably incompatible with what they held to be the only true wellspring of social life: the folk culture". [turner-citation] However, this aversion to modernity was more rhetorical than practical. American historian H. A. Turner elucidates this contradiction: "This seeming paradox has puzzled a good many observers, but there is a simple explanation. How, after all, was it possible to obtain vast stretches of Lebensraum for the purpose of de-urbanizing and de-industrializing Germany in the mid-twentieth century other than by conquest? And how was such conquest possible except by resort to a vast industrial war machine?" [turner-citation] This reliance on modern industrial capabilities for expansionist objectives highlights a complex relationship with modernity - a rejection of its ideals, yet a dependence on its technological advancements.

Historian of fascism Jeffrey Herf reconciled the inherent contradictions within Nazi ideology into a cohesive worldview he coined 'reactionary modernism.' This concept encapsulates the peculiar juxtaposition found in fascist attitudes toward modernity and technology. This phenomenon was not exclusive to Nazi Germany. - a similar attitude prevailed in Fascist Italy, notably in Mussolini’s temporary infatuation with the Futurism movement. Led by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Futurism celebrated speed, technology, and the aesthetics of war—themes that resonated deeply with the fascist ideology. Marinetti’s proclamation of “the beauty of machines and of war, and of a will pulsating through modern technology” found a receptive audience among those drawn to fascism. [herf-citation] This alignment highlights how the Italian fascists, like their German counterparts, selectively adopted elements of modernity that aligned with their ideological goals, for the Fascists of Italy despised liberalism and the intellectual products of the Enlightenment. 

More generally, there are a number of defining aspects of the two primary fascist states that constrain the existence of fascism to a particular historical era. Nationalism (and by extension ultranationalism) cannot exist before the evolution of the nation-state as a meaningful political entity, which occurred following the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 and laid the groundwork for modern national identities. Thus a state based on populist nationalism cannot be said to have existed before the mid-to-late 17th century at the earliest. 

Further, the process of urbanization dramatically reshaped the social and political landscape, setting the stage for the rise of fascist movements. As populations migrated from rural to urban areas, new social dynamics emerged. Cities became melting pots of ideas and ideologies, providing fertile ground for the dissemination of fascist principles. This urban setting facilitated easier organization of mass rallies, enabling direct engagement with a large, concentrated populace. The heightened interaction in urban centers also meant that nationalist messages could spread more rapidly and effectively, bolstering the fascist cause.

In tandem with urbanization, advancements in literacy and communication technologies played pivotal roles in the ascendancy of fascist regimes, particularly in Nazi Germany. The rise in literacy rates opened up vast segments of the population to the influence of fascist propaganda, disseminated through newspapers, pamphlets, and other printed materials. Meanwhile, breakthroughs in communication technology, such as radio and film, were harnessed to amplify the Nazi message, reaching an even wider audience. These technologies were not mere conduits of information; they became powerful tools of control and persuasion, integral to creating a pervasive influence over the German populace. The synergistic effect of these modern developments - the nation-state, urbanization, literacy, and communication technology - was crucial in enabling the mass political movements that brought fascist parties like the Nazis to power.

The process of modernization was not just incidental to the rise of fascism; the transformational changes it yielded were necessary prerequisites to it, enabling the conditions under which fascist states could emerge and thrive. Even though fascists in the early 20th century "...were opposed to Enlightenment ideals and capitalist precepts, [they] were eager to absorb those aspects of modernity...that could be reconfigured within their antirational concept of national identity". [antliff-citation]

The addition of a reliance on developments of modernity to the demarcation criteria for fascism allows us to distinguish between genuine fascism (according to Griffin) and other states that may share ideological similarities. Imperial Russia under Nicholas I, for example, shares many traits in common with both Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy- they too wanted to return to a time of previous glory after suffering humiliations the hands of a foreign enemy (the Golden Horde) - they sought territorial expansion (and found their *lebensraum* in Siberia), and like Italy, they derived legitimacy from a connection to Ancient Rome (they were the heart of Orthodox Christianity). The doctrine of 'official nationality', with three tenets 'Orthodoxy, autocracy, and nationality' reflected the authoritarian ultranationalism of the Third Reich and Mussolini's Italy. [pain-citation] However, late-Romanov Russia was not a product of modernization in the same way that the two definitive fascist states were, and is not considered to be an example of an instantiation of fascism by any mainstream historian.

Despite their palingenetic aspirations (at least on the level of rhetoric) there was no desire to return in actuality to the conditions of the mythologized past - even Mussolini elucidated in *The Doctrine of Fascism* that "...the Fascist negation of Socialism, Democracy and Liberalism must not be taken to mean that Fascism desires to lead the world back to the state of affairs before 1789...We do not desire to turn back". [mussolini-citation] Mussolini closed the same text with a reaffirmation that fascism as an ideology was explicitly contemporary:

"If every age has its own characteristic doctrine, there are a thousand signs that point to Fascism as the characteristic doctrine of our time....Fascism has henceforth in the world the universality of all those doctrines which, in realizing themselves, have represented a stage in the history of the human spirit." [mussolini-citation]

The rise of fascist states in the early 20th century, epitomized by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, was not an anachronistic throwback to a mythical past but rather a distinct product of modern developments - regardless of what messages their leaders projected. The emergence of the nation-state, urbanization, increased literacy, and advancements in communication technology were not mere backdrops but active facilitators in the rise of fascist ideologies. These elements, combined with the selective embrace of modernity's technological achievements, underscore the paradoxical, self-contradictory nature that is so central to fascism. Much like the enemy is both strong and weak, fascist states engaged not only in palingenetic ultranationalism but in the fervent adoption of those unique aspects of modernity that were compatible with their worldview - '[looking] to both a mythic past and a technological future'.




---